# Codealong 1.1 - Hello World

Let's build our first Java application! A very common first program to write is the famous "Hello World" program. It takes no input from the user, and simply prints the message "Hello World!" to the user. In our first Java program, we will create the simplest form of a Hello World program. Following that, we will expand on our program and see how we can expand its functionality using Java.

To start off, let's write our Java version of Hello World like this:

```
public class HelloWorld {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.print("Hello World!");
    }
}
```

Navigate to the "codealongs/C0" folder in your repository, here you will find an empty source-file named "HelloWorld.java". This is where we will enter the above code! There is a package-declaration at the top of the file that we can ignore for now. Make sure that you get everything exactly right, else it will not compile.

If you get lost, you will find a completed version of this code in the "codealongs" folder of the repo.

### Executing your program
Now, there's a lot going on here, but don't worry too much about that, we will get into all the details eventually. For now, we will just be happy about having created our first Java program. To run a Java program, the source code needs to be compiled into bytecode, which can be interpreted by the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). There's an explicit way of doing this, via the terminal, and there's an automatic way to do it in VSCode. For now, let's start with the automatic way. To execute your code, press either the triangle-shaped "Run Java" button in the top right-hand corner of your screen, or the grey "Run" command just above the line in your code that includes the call to `main()`. If everything works as it should, you will see a terminal prompt opening on the bottom of your screen, and the message "Hello World!" displayed. Amazing! We have created and run our first Java Program!

### Working with the terminal
Let's do it the explicit way as well. Start by opening a terminal window. Then navigate to your repository folder. You can use the command `cd` to change your terminal working directory. Once in the correct folder, enter the following into the terminal prompt: `javac codealongs/C0/HelloWord.java`. This will tell the compiler to compile the `HelloWorld.java` file into bytecode which can be read by the JVM. When you run this command, you will see a `HelloWorld.class` file appearing in your codealongs/C0 directory.

Next, enter the following into the same terminal prompt: `java codealongs.C0.HelloWorld`. This will tell the Java launcher to execute HelloWorld, belonging to the `codealongs.C0` package, and hopefully, you will see the same "Hello World!" message printed in the terminal!

This was a lot of work to do the same thing as the "Run Java" button, wasn't it?! Well, that's the benefit of working with an IDE. Simple solutions to everyday actions within software development.

### Pushing to GitHub
Now that we've created an executable version of our `HelloWorld.java` file, let's commit the changes, and push them to our GitHub repo! Go to the version control page, and you will see that your .java-file is now listed as a Change. Stage your change for comitting, and enter a reasonable commit message, e.g. "This is my first committed .java file!". Press Commit, and sync your changes to your online repo. You may get a message from VSCode stating that you have not saved your changes yet. In order to commit and push changes, the files in question need to be saved first (VSCode keeps it open as an unsaved file). Just save your local file before commiting and it should work.

Great! We have created our first Java program, and we have pushed it to GitHub! This is a work-flow we will be using a lot during the course. Get used to working with code editing in VSCode, and file tracing via GitHub. It is not only beneficial for this course, but an essential part of working within modern software development. Nearly every job advert within this sector will ask for experience in Git and GitHub.