# Codealong 1.2 - Extending our Hello World application

Let's add some extra functionality to our application! Don't worry about not understanding what's going on here, this exercise is intended to get you up and running, and shows many concepts of Java; we will go through them one by one as we progress through the course!

```
import javax.swing.*;

public class HelloJava {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    JFrame frame = new JFrame("Hello, Java!");
    frame.setSize(350, 250);
    JLabel label = new JLabel("Hello, Mjukvarutestare!", JLabel.CENTER);
    frame.add(label);
    frame.setVisible(true);
  }
}
```

Try to execute the program (you can use either the explicit method or the built-in "Run Java" function) and see what happens!

Cool. It seems like our HelloJava program now opens a little windowed frame and prints the message there instead. We've also complicated our program slightly, by introducing things like objects, imports and variables. We will get to them eventually!

### Classes
If we ignore the first line about importing the javax.swing package (we'll get to imports later on), the second to first row in our program reads

```
public class HelloJava {
    // Stuff
}
```

This segment of the code defines our <i><b>class</i></b> `HelloJava`. Classes are the fundamental building blocks of the Java programming language. Advanced Java applications will be built-up by hundreds or thousands of classes. Our little program here contains only a single class, named HelloJava. The content of the class is encapsulated by the curly braces `{}`. Classes contain data items, and functions that operate on that data. In Java, data is contained in <i><b>variables</b></i>, and functions are called <i><b>methods</i></b>. We will expand greatly on classes later on, as they are the foundational stone upon which the Java language is built.

### Main
The next line in our program contains our <i><b>main method</i></b>. It reads as follows:

```
public static void main(String[] args) {
    // Stuff
}
```

When we called upon the `java` launcher to execute our `HelloJava` program, the launcher searched through our HelloJava class to see if it contained a call to `main()` with the correct signature. Luckily, it did, and therefore the main method was executed. Every single Java application must contain at least one class with a main() method to intiate the exectution of the program. 

Just like with our class, the content of the main method is encapsulated between another set of curly braces. Note how the entirety of main exists within the curly braces of HelloJava. This means that main() belongs to the HelloJava class.

Within the parenthese of main() there is a code snippet that says `String[] args`. We don't need to bother too much with that right now, but it allows us to pass on additional arguments to our class when we execute it.

### The rest of our program
Let's have a look at the rest of our HelloJava program. In the next line (`JFrame frame = new JFrame("Hello, Java!");`) we create a new object. We allocate memory for a JFrame object and give it the variable name `frame`. The `new` keyword here specifices that we are creating a new object based on the class `JFrame`. We also pass an argument to `JFrame()`, telling it to create the JFrame object with the text "Hello, Mjukvarutestare!".

On the next line (`frame.setSize(300, 150);`) we invoke a method on our newly created frame object. The method `setSize()` is pre-defined by the `JFrame` class, and modifies the size of the window that is produced when we execute the code. The two numbers 300 and 150 represent the width and height of the window in pixels, respectively.

Similarly to the `frame` object, we now create a `label` object that holds our message. `JLabel label = new JLabel("Hello, Mjukvarutestare!", JLabel.CENTER);` allocates a variable `label` of type `JLabel`, which we instantiate with a new object of the `JLabel` class. We pass as arguments our text message "Hello,Mjukvarutestare!" and a variable `JLabel.CENTER` which positions the message in the center of the frame.

Next, with the line `frame.add(label);` we add our label object to our frame object. In this statement we invoke the method `add()` on our `frame` object and pass along `label` as our argument. All of this will be explained in much more detail later on!

Finally, with the last line of `main()`, `frame.setVisible(true);` we show the frame and the content using the method `setVisible()`. Here, we pass a boolean value `true`. A <i>boolean</i> is a data type that has only one of two values. Most commonly, booleans are referred to as `true` or `false`, but can also be expressed as e.g. `0` and `1`. In our case, passing `true` to `setVisible()` means that our frame is displayed.





