# Intro lecture
## Setting up your environment

### Installing JDK
In order to get started with Java programming, you will need to install a (current) version of the Java Development Kit (JDK). The JDK includes lots of stuff, but we will mainly be using three things:

<ul>
<li>Compiler - A java program that compiles our writte source code in to bytecode.</li>
<li>Launcher - A java program that reads bytecode and executes it into machine code.</li>
<li>JShell - REPL - A shell that gives us a REPL (Read-Evaluate-Print-Loop) terminal where we can do simple scripting to test different java statements</li>
</ul>

To install the latest version of the JDK (JDK 20), navigate to Oracle's <a href="https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/#jdk20-windows">Java Downloads</a> site an installer corresponding to your operating system.

### Installing VSCode
We will be using an integrated development environment (IDE) software. An IDE is a graphical software that provides additional functionalities related to programming in specific programming languages, beyond using a normal text editor such as Notepad. Some IDEs are specialized towards one language, whereas others support multiple languages. Modern IDEs can usually handle multiple aspects of software development, including writing and executing source code, debugging, version control, etc.<br>

In this course, we will be using VSCode, which is distributed under a free license by Microsoft. VSCode is a flexible and lightweight IDE, suitable for development in many different languages. It operates on a basic platform, upon which you can incorporate extensions to work with e.g. different programming languages. To install VS Code, navigate to <a href="https://code.visualstudio.com/Download">Visualstudio.com</a> and again choose an appopriate installer. After installation has finished, launch the program and you will be prompted by a new window to start your first project.

Once installed, make sure to also download the extension "Extension Pack for Java" for your VS Code, to gain additional funcitonalities related to Java such as e.g. code completion, automatic method generation, etc.

Also, install the extension "Live Share", you can find it by searching in the extension manager. We will be using it for code-along sessions.
