# Lecture 1.4 - Statements
## Statements
A statement in Java is similar to a sentence in natural language. They are the basic execution building blocks that create all of the magic that is going to occur in your program. Statements are where all of our semi-colons come from. Semi-colon is used to signal the end of a single statement.

Generally, we can group statements into three different categories; expression statements, declaration statements, and control statements. We will look at each of them in turn, and see how they build up the main part of our Java programs.

### Expression statements
An expression is a combination of values, constants, operators and functions that produces a result when it is executed. An expression always has a type, it can be e.g. a numerical type, as in an addition of two values, or some kind of reference type, like when we assign new objects to variables. There is also a special type for expressions: `void`. We have seen `void` in our call to our `main()` method in our `HelloWorld` and `HelloJava` programs. a `void`-type expression is one that does not generate any result, we merely run it for it's "side effects".

We have run into multiple examples of expressions already in our few lectures before this one. Every time when we assign a value to a variable, it is an expression!

Here are three simple examples of numerical expressions:

```
7;
3 + 7;
2 * 5 - 3;
```

All of the three lines above are expressions, and they all evaluate to the same thing: 7. The first line contains only an explicit value, whereas the other two contain a combination of values and operator(s). We will talk more about operators in the next chapter.

### Declaration statements
We use a declaration statement to declare a new variable by specifying their type and name. We have already done this multiple time, but let's list a few examples again:
```
int maxStock;
boolean isFull;
String message;
```

As we have mentioned earlier, we can also assign a value immediately when we declare a variable:
```
int maxStock = 1200;
boolean isFull = false;
String message = "Thank you for your co-operation.";
```

In Java, we can also declare multiple variables in a single statement, by separating them with commas. Note that this will produce an error if all variables are not of the same type.
```
int maxStock, minStock;
boolean isFull = true, isCompatible = false;
```

### Control statements
Finally, we have control statements. A control statement controls the flow of execution through evaluating expression statements. If you have done any programming before, you have probably come across some of the more common ones such as the <i>if</i>-statement, the <i>while</i>- and <i>for</i>-loops or the <i>continue</i> or <i>break</i> jump statements. We will not delve to much into control statements right now, but will talk a lot more about them in lecture 2.1 - Control Flow.
