## Loops
Loops are about repetition, or as it is often referred to in computer science, <i>iteration</i>. Iterative processes are among those tasks where computers outshine us humans by miles and miles. There's nothing a computer loves more than executing a mundane task over and over again. Actually, they (the computers) love it so much that there's actually a significant risk that your computer gets stuck in executing an infinite or near infinite loop if you are not careful about your conditional statements.

### While
A loop repeats a block of code until a certain condition is met. The simplest form of loop is a <i>while loop</i>, which evaluates a `condition` and then executes a statement if the `condition` evaluates to `true`. After the statement is executed it returns to the top and evaluates the condition once more. This process is repeated indefinitely, as long as the `condition` evaluates to `true`. The loop is iterated <i>while</i> the condition is true!
```
while (condition) 
    statement;

// Or, with actual real examples

int iterations = 0;
        
while (iterations < 15) {
    System.out.println(iterations + ": This while-loop is now executing!");
    iterations++;
}
```
The second example will first declare an integer variable named `iterations` and assign it the value 0. Then, as it enters the while-loop, it evaluates the loop condition and finds that iterations (0) is less than 15. The conditions thus evaluates to `true` and the loop statement block is executed. In the statement, we first print the current iteration of the loop, and then increment the `iterations` variable by 1 using the `++` increment operator. The loop then returns to the top and evaluates the loop condition again (iterations is now 1, so still less than 15). The condition is still true, so the statement will execute again, incrementing `iterations` by another step, and so on. Eventually, iterations will have incremented all the way to 15, upon which the condition evaluates to false (15 is not less than 15), and the loop stops executing.

While loops are very useful and exists in a huge variety of contexts. They are however relatively dangerous, as it is very easy to achieve an infinite while-loop. If the condition never evaluates to false, the loop will continue to execute over and over again. Loops without proper exit criteria are a relatively common cause of software failure, and a perfect case for a test engineer to identify as a defect! Consider our previous example, and imagine what happens if the `iterations` variable is not incremented inside of the loop statement!

### Do/While
The <i>do/while</i> is a special case of the while loop, which executes its statement before it evaluates the condition. It is useful when you need to make sure the statement is executed at least once. A classic example for a do/while loop is asking a user for input:
```
do {
    System.out.println("Enter valid customer ID: ")
    String customerId = askUserForCustomerId();
} while (customerId.isGenuine() == false);
```
First, the <i>do</i> statement is executed, and the message "Enter valid customer ID: " is printed, and a method `askUserForCustomerId()` is executed (let's just imagine that this method takes a customer ID input from the user, we don't need to care about how right now). Then, the loop evaluates the conditional statement. This condition in itself requires execution of a method `isGenuine()` (again let's imagine that this method evaluates if a customer ID is genuine or not). If the customer ID is not genuine, the while condition will evaluate to false, and the loop is repeated once more. Eventually (hopefully) a genuine customer ID is entered, and the loop will exit!

### For
Possibly the most well-known of the common loops is the for loop. It is strongly associated with <i>iterative procedures</i> as it is great at counting stuff. A basic for loop requires three conditional parameters: an `initializing statement`, a `condition`, and an `incrementor`.
```
for (initialization; condition; incrementor)
    statement;
```
The `initilization` declares a variable(s) which will be limited to the scope of the for loop. Then, the `condition` (which involves the intialized variable(s)) is evaluated. If the condition evaluates to `true`, then the statement (or code block) is executed, and the `incrementor` statement is executed to update the loop variable(s) for the next iteration. This will all sound a bit complex, but it is really quite simple once you put actual varibles in there. Let's consider the while-loop that we created earlier:
```
while (iterations < 15) {
    System.out.println(iterations + ": This while-loop is now executing!");
    iterations++;
}
```
While (no pun intended!) it served as a good example of how a while loop functions, this is actually much better suited as a for loop! Let's refactor this section of code into a for loop instead:
```
for (int i = 0; i < 15; i++) 
    System.out.println(i + ": This for-loop is now executing!");
```
Here, we first initialized the iterator variable `i` and assigned it a starting value 0. We then say that the for loop is to go as long as our condition `i < 15` is met. Finally, in the incrementor step, we tell it that every iteration should increment our iterator `i` by 1. This will print out the message 15 times (remember we start at 0!), and then the loop is completed. Afor loop is fairly flexible, you can for example initialize your variables outside the scope of the for loop if you want to:
```
int x;
for (x = 0; x < 10; x++)
    statement;
```
You can also use multiple variables in your conditional parameters:
```
for (int x = 0, y = 1000; x + y > 25; x++, y=y/2)
    System.out.println(x + y);
```
See if you can figure out what this last x/y for loop does!

## Break/Continue
In order to make it easier to not run into infinite loops, Java provides two alternative ways of exiting an on-going loop, `break` and `continue`. If a `break` statement is executed the loop will stop immediately and proceed to executing the code the follows after the ongoing loop.
```
while (true) {
    if (faultyInput())
        break;
    
    // As long as input is correct, execute this code block
}
// If faultyInput() evaluates to true, then break causes execution to continue from here.
```
The `continue` statement is similar to `break`, except that it exits only the on-going iteration of the loop. If a continue statement is executed, the rest of the loop body is skipped, and the loop starts from the the top with the next iteration. Consider the following example:
```
for (int x = 0; x < 50; x++) {
    if (x % 7 != 0)
        continue;
    System.out.println(x);
}
```
The conditional statement in the if-statement uses two operators that we have just touched on; remainder (`%`) and inequality (`!=`). `x % 7` checks if x is divisible by 7, and returns the remainder (if it is divisible by 7 it will return 0). `!= 0` then evaluates if this remainder is NOT equal to 0. In essence, the condition will return true if `x` is exactly divisible by 7, i.e., if the remainder from `x % 7` is not 0. Can you figure out what numbers will be printed by this for-loop?