# Exercises - Lecture 3 - Classes

### Constructors
<ol>
<li><b>Book Class</b><br>
Create a Book class with the following properties: title (String), author (String), and year (int). Implement a parameterless constructor that initializes the properties with default values. Create an instance of the Book class using the default constructor and print the details.
</li><br>

<li><b>Student Class</b><br>
Create a Student class with the following properties: name (String), age (int), and grade (double). Implement a parameterized constructor that initializes all the properties. Create an instance of the Student class with sample values and print the details.
</li><br>

<li><b>Car Class</b><br>
Create a Car class with the following properties: make (String), model (String), year (int), and color (String). Implement multiple constructors, including a parameterized constructor and constructor chaining. Create instances of the Car class using different constructors and print the details.
</li><br>
</ol>

## Creating and Manipulating Objects in Java
In this exercise, we will explore the concept of classes and constructors by imagining and creating objects in Java. Remember, coding is not just about technical skills; it's also a creative process that allows us to bring our ideas to life.

### Task 1: Create a Class Describing an Object

Create a new Java file (.java) with a class that represents a physical object of your choice. It could be a person, an animal, an airplane, or anything else you can imagine. Inside the class:
<ol>
<li>Declare three variables of three different types that are relevant to your chosen object.</li>
<li>Initialize these variables with reasonable values. For example, if you chose a "Person" class, you might have variables for name (String), age (int), and height (double).</li>
</ol>

### Task 2: Define a Container Class

Create another Java file (.java) to define a "container" class for your objects. Think of this as a vessel for storing instances of your chosen object. Inside this class:

<ol>
<li>Create two separate instances of the class you defined in Task 1. These instances represent two unique objects of the same type.</li>
</ol>

### Task 3: Create a main()-method to create instances of your classes

Create a third Java file (.java) that serves as your main executor-class. In this class:

<ol>
<li>Create a new instance of your Container Class.</li>
<li>Print the details of the two objects in your container.</li>
<li>Change the values of one of the instances such that the two objects have unique instance variable values. Print the details again.</li>
<li>Create a third object of your intial class from task 1, outside of your container (i.e. directly in the main()-method). Assign reasonable values to it</li>
<li>Create a fourth object of your initial class from task 1, outside of your container. Assign it with one of the objects inside the Container object. (<code>Object newObject = object1;</code>)</li>
</ol>
You should now have four variables of your initial class. Two inside of the container, and two outside of the container.


### Task 4: Understanding References

<ol>
<li>Print the reference values of all four variables (the two instances from Task 2 and the new variable from Task 3) to the terminal. This can be done by simply using print(variablename).</li>
<li>Analyze the results: What do you observe? Why do the reference values behave the way they do?</li>
</ol>

### Task 5: Modifying Variables and Observing Changes

<ol>
<li>Re-assign the values of the two variables in the Container with new values. For example, if you have a "Person" class, change the name, age, and other attributes.</li>
<li>Observe the values of the other two variables (the ones outside of the Container). Explain the behavior you see. How do changes to one object affect the others?</li>
</ol>

### Task 6: Constructors

Refactor your code in the Classes and the Main-program such that you have parameterised constructors that you use to create your objects. Let your creativity run free!