# Exercises - Lecture 5 - Arrays
<ol>
<li><b>Arrays in jshell</b><br>
Launch jshell and perform the following tasks:
<ol type="a">
<li>Declare an array of strings called <code>fruits</code> and initialize it with the values "apple", "banana", "orange", "grape".</li>
<li>Print the length of the array.</li>
<li>Replace the fruit at index 1 with "pear". This should result in the list: ["apple", "pear", "orange", "grape"]</li>
<li>Create a new String-Array variable and name it <code>moreFruits</code>.</li>
<li>Assign the new variable with a copy of the <code>fruits</code> Array using the <code>copyOf()</code> method in the <code>Arrays</Code>-class. Make the copy six elements long.</li>
<li>Print the new Array. What are the values of the new elements?</li>
<li>Assign new fruit Strings to the empty elements in <code>moreFruits</code>.</li>
<li>Create another String-Array variable and name it <code>lessFruits</code>.</li>
<li>Assign <code>lessFruits</code> with a copy of the <code>fruits</code> Array using the <code>copyOf()</code> method in the <code>Arrays</Code>-class. Make the copy two elements long.</li>
<li>What are the elements in the <code>lessFruits</code> Array?</li>
</ol></li><br>



<li><b>Array of Integers</b><br>
Write a Java class that creates an array of integer values chosen at random (you can choose them yourself, or implement a <code>Random</code>-object). Create a method that takes two integers as input. The method should substitute the integer at the first position for the one in the second position. Create another method that takes a single integer as input. The method should take the integer at the input position and multiply it by itself. Write a main-method to check that your methods work as intended. 
</li><br>

<li><b>Array of Words</b><br>
Write a Java program that works with an array of words. Initialize an array with a few words of your choice. Your program should find the longest word in the array, count the number of letters in each word, and sort the array in alphabetical order. For extra challenge, instead count the number of vowels in each word!
</li><br>

<li><b>Enums</b><br>
Write an Enum class that creates one instance each of the planets of the solar system. In a separate class, create a main-method that prints all of the values of your Enum to the terminal. <br>
For extra challenge, include the mass and radius of all planets as separate data fields, such that they can be printed using <code>getMass()</code> and <code>getRadius</code>.
</li><br>

<li><b>Array of Dates</b><br>
Write a Java program that operates on an array of java.util.Date objects. Initialize an array with some random dates. Your program should find the earliest and latest dates in the array and calculate the time difference between them in whole days.
</li><br>

<li><b>Playlist manager</b><br>
Create a package named "music" that contains two classes: "Song" and "Playlist." The Song class should have properties like title, artist, and duration. The Playlist class should have a method to display the total duration of the playlist, and print the contents of the playlist.  

In a separate class, named "MusicApp," write a main method. Import the "music" package and create objects of both the Song and Playlist classes. Add multiple songs to the playlist and display the total duration of the playlist.
</li><br>

<li><b>Library catalog</b><br>
Create a package named "library" that contains two classes: "Book" and "LibraryCatalog." The Book class should have properties like title, author, and publication year. The LibraryCatalog class should have methods to add books, search books by title or author, and display all books in the catalog.  

In a separate class, named "LibraryApp," write a main method. Import the "library" package and create objects of both the Book and LibraryCatalog classes. Add multiple books to the catalog and perform search operations by title or author. Display the information of the books found in the search results.
</li><br>
</ol>